# Assembly and Molecular Architecture of the p85α homodimer
## Abstract
Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) are a family of lipid kinases that are activated by growth factor and G-protein coupled receptors, and propagate
intracellular signals for growth, survival, proliferation, and metabolism. p85α, a modular protein consisting of 5 domains, binds and inhibits the enzymatic activity of Class IA PI3Ks. Here, we describe the structural states of the p85α dimer, based on data from in vivo and in vitro solution characterization. Our in vitro assembly and structural analyses have been enabled by the creation of cysteine-free p85α that is functionally equivalent to native p85α. Analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) studies showed that p85α undergoes rapidly reversible monomer-dimer assembly that is highly exothermic in nature. In addition to the documented SH3-PR1 dimerization interaction, we identified a second intermolecular interaction mediated by cSH2 domains at the C- terminal end of the polypeptide. We have demonstrated in vivo concentration-dependent dimerization of p85α using fluorescence fluctuation spectroscopy (FFS). Finally, we have defined solution conditions under which the protein is predominantly monomeric or dimeric, providing the basis for small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and chemical cross-linking structural analysis of the discrete dimer. These experimental data have been used for the integrative structure determination of the p85α dimer. Our study provides new insight into the structure and assembly of the p85α homodimer and suggests that this protein is a highly dynamic molecule whose conformational flexibility allows it to transiently associate with multiple binding proteins.

## Integrative Modeling
These scripts demonstrate the use of [IMP](http://integrativemodeling.org), [MODELLER](http://salilab.org/modeller), and [PMI](https://github.com/salilab/pmi) in the modeling of the p85α homo-dimer using small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and DSS/DST chemical cross-links.

First, [MODELLER](http://salilab.org/modeller) is used to generate
initial structures for the individual subunits and domains in the p85α homo-dimer. Then, IMP
is used to model these subunits and domains using DSS/DST crosslinks and other spatial restraints for the p85α homo-dimer.

The modeling protocol will work with a default build of IMP, but for most effective sampling, IMP should be built with [MPI](http://integrativemodeling.org/2.5.0/doc/ref/namespaceIMP_1_1mpi.html) so that replica exchange can be used.

## List of files and directories:
- [`LoPiccolo_p85_JBC_Supplement.pdf`](https://github.com/integrativemodeling/p85/blob/master/LoPiccolo_p85_JBC_Supplement.pdf)  SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION for the Journal of Biological Chemistry (JBC) article in 2015.

- `data`		                         contains all relevant data, input structures that were generated by MODELLER or deposited in PDB, etc.

- `scripts`

  - `MODELLER_scripts/p85` MODELLER scripts to generate comparative models of p85

- `scripts/output.1/pdbs`    The best 500 models from the modeling are accumulated in this directory, and updated as the calculation proceeds.
- `scripts/output.1/rmfs`    The structures of the lowest temperature replica will be written here as [RMF files](http://integrativemodeling.org/rmf/).
- `scripts/output.1/stat.n.out`	 Log files. They contain all relevant numbers of the calculation.

## Running the MODELLER scripts:
- `cd scripts/MODELLER_scripts`

## Running the IMP/PMI scripts for the p85 homo-dimer:
with crystal interfaces:

Next, merge and cluster the resulting models (this script can also be used to
combine results from multiple independent runs):

Finally, analyze the resulting clusters:

## Information

_Author(s)_: Seung Joong Kim and Jaclyn LoPiccolo

_Date_: October 7th, 2015

_License_: [CC BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/)
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International License.

## Publications
 - Jaclyn LoPiccolo<sup>1</sup>\*, Seung Joong Kim<sup>4</sup>\*, Yi Shi<sup>5</sup>, Bin Wu<sup>3</sup>, Haiyan Wu<sup>1</sup>, Brian T. Chait<sup>5</sup>, Robert H. Singer<sup>3</sup>, Andrej Sali<sup>4</sup>, Michael Brenowitz<sup>2</sup>, Anne R. Bresnick<sup>2</sup>, and Jonathan M. Backer<sup>1,2</sup>, [Assembly and Molecular Architecture of the p85α homodimer](https://github.com/integrativemodeling/p85/blob/master/LoPiccolo_p85_JBC_Supplement.pdf), Journal of Biological Chemistry, 2015, submitted.

 \*These authors contributed equally to this work as co-first authors.
 
<sup>1</sup>Department of Molecular Pharmacology, <sup>2</sup>Department of Biochemistry, <sup>3</sup>Department of Anatomy and Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA

<sup>4</sup>Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences and Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, Byers Hall, 1700 4th Street, Suite 503B, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA

<sup>5</sup>Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry and Gaseous Ion Chemistry, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA
